docs/vision.md, before:

# butt-head — Vision

A `no_std` Rust library for processing button inputs in embedded systems. Transforms
clean boolean pin states into rich button events through a configurable state machine.
Pure logic — no I/O, no HAL, no interrupts. The button counterpart to
[pot-head](https://crates.io/crates/pot-head).

## Design Philosophy

- **Pure abstraction** — no hardware coupling. Takes a `bool` + an instant, returns events.
- **Focused** — gesture recognition only. Debouncing is out of scope; handle it upstream
  with hardware or a dedicated crate.
- **Testable** — unit test with `true`/`false` and fake timestamps, no mocks needed.
- **Static config** — `&'static Config` stored in flash, compile-time validated via `const fn validate()`.
- **Minimal footprint** — documented RAM/flash usage, benchmarked on target platforms.
- **Feature-gated dependencies** — only `defmt` logging is optional; no platform integrations bundled.

## Time Abstraction

Borrows the trait pattern from [rgb-sequencer](https://crates.io/crates/rgb-sequencer).
The user passes the current instant on each `update()` call. The crate never touches
hardware timers or clocks.

```rust
pub trait TimeDuration: Copy + PartialEq {
    const ZERO: Self;
    fn as_millis(&self) -> u64;
    fn from_millis(millis: u64) -> Self;
    fn saturating_sub(self, other: Self) -> Self;
}

pub trait TimeInstant: Copy {
    type Duration: TimeDuration;
    fn duration_since(&self, earlier: Self) -> Self::Duration;
}
```

Users implement these traits for their platform's time types.

## Events

Four event types cover all button interactions:

```rust
pub enum Event<D: TimeDuration> {
    /// The button was pressed. Fires on every press edge.
    Press,

    /// The button was released. `duration` is the total time it was held.
    Release { duration: D },

    /// A complete click gesture (press + release, no hold).
    /// `count` starts at 1. Fires immediately on each release.
    /// A double-click produces `Click { count: 1 }` on first release,
    /// then `Click { count: 2 }` on second release.
    Click { count: u8 },

    /// The button is being held. Fires repeatedly at a configured interval.
    /// `clicks_before` is the number of clicks that preceded this hold
    /// (0 = plain hold, 1 = click+hold, 2 = double-click+hold, ...).
    /// `level` increments on each repeat (0 = first hold event, 1 = second, ...).
    Hold { clicks_before: u8, level: u8 },
}
```

### Event semantics

- **Click fires immediately** — no waiting for a multi-click timeout. The first release
  emits `Click { count: 1 }`, the second `Click { count: 2 }`, etc. Zero added latency.
- **Hold suppresses Click** — if any `Hold` event was emitted during a press, the
  subsequent release does NOT emit `Click`. A long press is not a click.
- **Hold unifies press-and-hold with click-and-hold** — `clicks_before` distinguishes
  them. The user matches on the value they care about.
- **Hold level encodes duration** — the user can compute real duration as
  `hold_delay + level * hold_interval` if needed.

## Service Timing

Inspired by [rgb-sequencer](https://crates.io/crates/rgb-sequencer), `update()` returns
both the event and a hint telling the caller when to call again:

```rust
pub struct UpdateResult<D: TimeDuration> {
    pub event: Option<Event<D>>,
    pub next_service: ServiceTiming<D>,
}

pub enum ServiceTiming<D> {
    /// Call back as soon as possible.
    Immediate,
    /// Nothing will happen until at least this delay elapses.
    Delay(D),
    /// Button is idle — only call again when the input changes.
    Idle,
}
```

The contract: call `update()` when the pin changes state OR when the `next_service`
delay expires. Missing a deadline is not catastrophic — the state machine catches up on
the next call. Extra calls are harmless — unchanged input returns `Idle` with no event.

This enables optimal power usage: sleep during idle, wake on interrupt, precise
timer-driven wakeups during interaction.

## Configuration

```rust
pub struct Config<D: TimeDuration> {
    /// Invert input polarity (true = pin low means pressed).
    pub active_low: bool,

    /// Maximum gap between clicks to count as multi-click.
    pub click_timeout: D,

    /// Time before the first Hold event fires.
    pub hold_delay: D,

    /// Time between subsequent Hold events while held.
    pub hold_interval: D,
}
```

Compile-time validated via `const fn validate()`. Stored as `&'static Config` in flash.

## API

```rust
pub struct ButtHead<I: TimeInstant> { /* ... */ }

impl<I: TimeInstant> ButtHead<I> {
    pub fn new(config: &'static Config<I::Duration>) -> Self;

    /// Feed a clean (pre-debounced) input sample into the state machine.
    pub fn update(&mut self, is_pressed: bool, now: I) -> UpdateResult<I::Duration>;

    // State introspection
    pub fn is_pressed(&self) -> bool;
    pub fn is_idle(&self) -> bool;
    pub fn current_hold_duration(&self, now: I) -> Option<I::Duration>;
}
```

### Usage example

```rust
static CONFIG: Config<MyDuration> = Config {
    active_low: true,
    click_timeout: MyDuration::from_millis(300),
    hold_delay: MyDuration::from_millis(500),
    hold_interval: MyDuration::from_millis(200),
};

let mut button = ButtHead::new(&CONFIG);

loop {
    let result = button.update(pin.is_high(), now());

    if let Some(event) = result.event {
        match event {
            Event::Press => { /* immediate feedback, e.g. LED on */ }
            Event::Release { duration } => { /* e.g. LED off */ }
            Event::Click { count: 1 } => { /* single click */ }
            Event::Click { count: 2 } => { /* double click */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 0, level: 0 } => { /* hold started */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 0, level: 10.. } => { /* held a long time */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 1, .. } => { /* click then hold */ }
            _ => {}
        }
    }

    match result.next_service {
        ServiceTiming::Delay(d) => sleep(d),
        ServiceTiming::Idle => wait_for_pin_interrupt(),
        ServiceTiming::Immediate => continue,
    }
}
```

## Architecture

### State Machine

Operates on clean, pre-debounced edges. Three states:

```
         Edge::Press              Edge::Release
 ┌──────┐ ──────────► ┌─────────┐ ───────────────► ┌───────────────────┐
 │ Idle │             │ Pressed │                   │ WaitForMultiClick │
 └──────┘ ◄────────   └─────────┘                   └───────────────────┘
     ▲    timeout │       ▲    hold delay/interval        │   │
     │            │       │    (emit Hold)                │   │
     │            │       └───────────────────────────────┘   │
     │            │                 Edge::Press               │
     │            └───────────────────────────────────────────┘
     │                            timeout (finalize)
     │
     └─── Also: Release from Pressed goes directly to Idle
          when hold_level > 0 (long press is not a click)
```

#### Transition table

**Idle**

| Input       | Guard | Action       | Next State                                | next_service        |
| ----------- | ----- | ------------ | ----------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Edge::Press | —     | emit `Press` | Pressed { click_count: 0, hold_level: 0 } | `Delay(hold_delay)` |
| —           | —     | —            | Idle                                      | `Idle`              |

**Pressed**

| Input         | Guard                 | Action                                                  | Next State                      | next_service           |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| Edge::Release | hold_level > 0        | emit `Release { duration }`                             | Idle                            | `Idle`                 |
| Edge::Release | hold_level == 0       | emit `Release { duration }`, emit `Click { count + 1 }` | WaitForMultiClick { count + 1 } | `Delay(click_timeout)` |
| —             | hold deadline reached | emit `Hold { clicks_before: count, level }`             | hold_level += 1                 | `Delay(hold_interval)` |
| —             | no deadline reached   | —                                                       | (unchanged)                     | `Delay(remaining)`     |

**WaitForMultiClick**

| Input       | Guard               | Action       | Next State                                    | next_service        |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ------------ | --------------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Edge::Press | —                   | emit `Press` | Pressed { click_count: count, hold_level: 0 } | `Delay(hold_delay)` |
| —           | timeout elapsed     | —            | Idle                                          | `Idle`              |
| —           | timeout not elapsed | —            | (unchanged)                                   | `Delay(remaining)`  |

## Feature Flags

| Feature | What it enables                         | Dependency |
| ------- | --------------------------------------- | ---------- |
| `defmt` | Structured logging for events and state | defmt      |

## Differentiation from button-driver

|                    | button-driver                         | butt-head                                  |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| **Input**          | Wraps a GPIO pin                      | Takes a `bool`                             |
| **Debounce**       | Built-in (single fixed timer)         | Out of scope — handle upstream             |
| **Time**           | Internal, platform-specific           | User-provided via traits                   |
| **Output**         | Boolean flag queries + manual reset() | `Event` enum, pattern matching             |
| **Config**         | 3 runtime params                      | Rich static config, compile-time validated |
| **Hold**           | Single threshold                      | Repeating with delay + interval            |
| **Multi-click**    | Hardcoded max 3                       | Unbounded, fires immediately               |
| **Click-and-hold** | No                                    | Yes, via `clicks_before` field             |
| **Service timing** | No                                    | `ServiceTiming` tells caller when to wake  |
| **Testability**    | Needs hardware/mocks                  | `true`/`false` + fake time                 |
| **Philosophy**     | Hardware driver                       | Signal processor                           |

Commit message:

Update vision for Click event generation and add checked_add and checked_sub to TimeInstant trait

docs/vision.md, after:

# butt-head — Vision

A `no_std` Rust library for processing button inputs in embedded systems. Transforms clean boolean pin states into rich button events through a configurable state machine. Pure logic — no I/O, no HAL, no interrupts. The button counterpart to [pot-head](https://crates.io/crates/pot-head).

## Design Philosophy

- **Pure abstraction** — no hardware coupling. Takes a `bool` + an instant, returns events.
- **Focused** — gesture recognition only. Debouncing is out of scope; handle it upstream with hardware or a dedicated crate.
- **Testable** — unit test with `true`/`false` and fake timestamps, no mocks needed.
- **Static config** — `&'static Config` stored in flash, compile-time validated via `const fn validate()`.
- **Minimal footprint** — documented RAM/flash usage, benchmarked on target platforms.
- **Feature-gated dependencies** — only `defmt` logging is optional; no platform integrations bundled.

## Time Abstraction

Borrows the trait pattern from [rgb-sequencer](https://crates.io/crates/rgb-sequencer). The user passes the current instant on each `update()` call. The crate never touches hardware timers or clocks.

```rust
pub trait TimeDuration: Copy + PartialEq {
    const ZERO: Self;
    fn as_millis(&self) -> u64;
    fn from_millis(millis: u64) -> Self;
    fn saturating_sub(self, other: Self) -> Self;
}

pub trait TimeInstant: Copy {
    type Duration: TimeDuration;
    fn duration_since(&self, earlier: Self) -> Self::Duration;
    fn checked_add(self, duration: Self::Duration) -> Option<Self>;
    fn checked_sub(self, duration: Self::Duration) -> Option<Self>;
}
```

Users implement these traits for their platform's time types.

## Events

Four event types cover all button interactions:

```rust
pub enum Event<D: TimeDuration> {
    /// The button was pressed. Fires on every press edge.
    Press,

    /// The button was released. `duration` is the total time it was held.
    Release { duration: D },

    /// A complete click gesture (press + release, no hold).
    /// `count` starts at 1. Fires once after `click_timeout` expires with no
    /// further press. A double-click produces a single `Click { count: 2 }`.
    Click { count: u8 },

    /// The button is being held. Fires repeatedly at a configured interval.
    /// `clicks_before` is the number of clicks that preceded this hold
    /// (0 = plain hold, 1 = click+hold, 2 = double-click+hold, ...).
    /// `level` increments on each repeat (0 = first hold event, 1 = second, ...).
    Hold { clicks_before: u8, level: u8 },
}
```

### Event semantics

- **Click fires after timeout** — `Click { count }` is emitted once the `click_timeout` expires with no further press. This ensures a double-click never also triggers a single-click. The cost is added latency on every click equal to `click_timeout`.
- **Hold suppresses Click** — if any `Hold` event was emitted during a press, the subsequent release does NOT emit `Click`. A long press is not a click.
- **Hold unifies press-and-hold with click-and-hold** — `clicks_before` distinguishes them. The user matches on the value they care about.
- **Hold level encodes duration** — the user can compute real duration as `hold_delay + level * hold_interval` if needed.

## Service Timing

Inspired by [rgb-sequencer](https://crates.io/crates/rgb-sequencer), `update()` returns both the event and a hint telling the caller when to call again:

```rust
pub struct UpdateResult<D: TimeDuration> {
    pub event: Option<Event<D>>,
    pub next_service: ServiceTiming<D>,
}

pub enum ServiceTiming<D> {
    /// Call back as soon as possible.
    Immediate,
    /// Nothing will happen until at least this delay elapses.
    Delay(D),
    /// Button is idle — only call again when the input changes.
    Idle,
}
```

The contract: call `update()` when the pin changes state OR when the `next_service` delay expires. Missing a deadline is not catastrophic — the state machine catches up on the next call. Extra calls are harmless — unchanged input returns `Idle` with no event.

This enables optimal power usage: sleep during idle, wake on interrupt, precise timer-driven wakeups during interaction.

## Configuration

```rust
pub struct Config<D: TimeDuration> {
    /// Invert input polarity (true = pin low means pressed).
    pub active_low: bool,

    /// Maximum gap between clicks to count as multi-click.
    pub click_timeout: D,

    /// Time before the first Hold event fires.
    pub hold_delay: D,

    /// Time between subsequent Hold events while held.
    pub hold_interval: D,
}
```

Compile-time validated via `const fn validate()`. Stored as `&'static Config` in flash.

## API

```rust
pub struct ButtHead<I: TimeInstant> { /* ... */ }

impl<I: TimeInstant> ButtHead<I> {
    pub fn new(config: &'static Config<I::Duration>) -> Self;

    /// Feed a clean (pre-debounced) input sample into the state machine.
    pub fn update(&mut self, is_pressed: bool, now: I) -> UpdateResult<I::Duration>;

    // State introspection
    pub fn is_pressed(&self) -> bool;
    pub fn is_idle(&self) -> bool;
    pub fn current_hold_duration(&self, now: I) -> Option<I::Duration>;
}
```

### Usage example

```rust
static CONFIG: Config<MyDuration> = Config {
    active_low: true,
    click_timeout: MyDuration::from_millis(300),
    hold_delay: MyDuration::from_millis(500),
    hold_interval: MyDuration::from_millis(200),
};

let mut button = ButtHead::new(&CONFIG);

loop {
    let result = button.update(pin.is_high(), now());

    if let Some(event) = result.event {
        match event {
            Event::Press => { /* immediate feedback, e.g. LED on */ }
            Event::Release { duration } => { /* e.g. LED off */ }
            Event::Click { count: 1 } => { /* single click */ }
            Event::Click { count: 2 } => { /* double click */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 0, level: 0 } => { /* hold started */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 0, level: 10.. } => { /* held a long time */ }
            Event::Hold { clicks_before: 1, .. } => { /* click then hold */ }
            _ => {}
        }
    }

    match result.next_service {
        ServiceTiming::Delay(d) => sleep(d),
        ServiceTiming::Idle => wait_for_pin_interrupt(),
        ServiceTiming::Immediate => continue,
    }
}
```

## Architecture

### State Machine

Operates on clean, pre-debounced edges. Three states:

```
         Edge::Press              Edge::Release
 ┌──────┐ ──────────► ┌─────────┐ ───────────────► ┌───────────────────┐
 │ Idle │             │ Pressed │                   │ WaitForMultiClick │
 └──────┘ ◄────────   └─────────┘                   └───────────────────┘
     ▲    timeout │       ▲    hold delay/interval        │   │
     │            │       │    (emit Hold)                │   │
     │            │       └───────────────────────────────┘   │
     │            │                 Edge::Press               │
     │            └───────────────────────────────────────────┘
     │                            timeout (finalize)
     │
     └─── Also: Release from Pressed goes directly to Idle
          when hold_level > 0 (long press is not a click)
```

#### Transition table

**Idle**

| Input       | Guard | Action       | Next State                                | next_service        |
| ----------- | ----- | ------------ | ----------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Edge::Press | —     | emit `Press` | Pressed { click_count: 0, hold_level: 0 } | `Delay(hold_delay)` |
| —           | —     | —            | Idle                                      | `Idle`              |

**Pressed**

| Input         | Guard                 | Action                                                  | Next State                      | next_service           |
| ------------- | --------------------- | ------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------------- | ---------------------- |
| Edge::Release | hold_level > 0        | emit `Release { duration }`                             | Idle                            | `Idle`                 |
| Edge::Release | hold_level == 0       | emit `Release { duration }`                             | WaitForMultiClick { count + 1 } | `Delay(click_timeout)` |
| —             | hold deadline reached | emit `Hold { clicks_before: count, level }`             | hold_level += 1                 | `Delay(hold_interval)` |
| —             | no deadline reached   | —                                                       | (unchanged)                     | `Delay(remaining)`     |

**WaitForMultiClick**

| Input       | Guard               | Action       | Next State                                    | next_service        |
| ----------- | ------------------- | ------------ | --------------------------------------------- | ------------------- |
| Edge::Press | —                   | emit `Press` | Pressed { click_count: count, hold_level: 0 } | `Delay(hold_delay)` |
| —           | timeout elapsed     | emit `Click { count }` | Idle                                   | `Idle`              |
| —           | timeout not elapsed | —            | (unchanged)                                   | `Delay(remaining)`  |

## Feature Flags

| Feature | What it enables                         | Dependency |
| ------- | --------------------------------------- | ---------- |
| `defmt` | Structured logging for events and state | defmt      |

## Differentiation from button-driver

|                    | button-driver                         | butt-head                                  |
| ------------------ | ------------------------------------- | ------------------------------------------ |
| **Input**          | Wraps a GPIO pin                      | Takes a `bool`                             |
| **Debounce**       | Built-in (single fixed timer)         | Out of scope — handle upstream             |
| **Time**           | Internal, platform-specific           | User-provided via traits                   |
| **Output**         | Boolean flag queries + manual reset() | `Event` enum, pattern matching             |
| **Config**         | 3 runtime params                      | Rich static config, compile-time validated |
| **Hold**           | Single threshold                      | Repeating with delay + interval            |
| **Multi-click**    | Hardcoded max 3                       | Unbounded, fires immediately               |
| **Click-and-hold** | No                                    | Yes, via `clicks_before` field             |
| **Service timing** | No                                    | `ServiceTiming` tells caller when to wake  |
| **Testability**    | Needs hardware/mocks                  | `true`/`false` + fake time                 |
| **Philosophy**     | Hardware driver                       | Signal processor                           |
